Tenant Issue 3: Configuration and Provisioning (#9068)
camunda/camunda-docs: docs/self-managed/concepts/physical-tenants/provisioning-and-lifecycle.md

---
id: provisioning-and-lifecycle
title: "Provisioning and lifecycle"
sidebar_label: "Provisioning and lifecycle"
description: "Provision and manage Physical Tenants in 8.10, including restart behavior and out-of-scope operations."
---

This page describes how to provision and operate Physical Tenants in Camunda 8.10.

## Provisioning model in 8.10

> Physical Tenants are provisioned through static startup configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Physical Tenants are provisioned through static application configuration.
```

> - Add or change tenant configuration in startup config.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add or change tenant configuration in application config.
```

- Apply the change with a rolling restart.
- Validate startup status for every affected component.

> Dynamic runtime tenant creation and runtime tenant updates are out of scope for 8.10.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dynamic runtime tenant creation and runtime tenant updates are not available in 8.10.
```

## Add a new Physical Tenant

To add a tenant:

1. Add a new `camunda.physical-tenants.<tenant-key>` section in configuration.
2. Define the tenant-specific initialization and required assignments.
3. Ensure required storage and identity configuration is valid.
4. Apply the change through a rolling restart.

### Rolling restart expectations

During a rolling restart for tenant provisioning:

- Existing tenant traffic should continue according to your rollout strategy.
- New tenant availability starts after updated components are running and ready.
- Startup validation failures block readiness for affected components.

## Default tenant lifecycle

In 8.10, the default Physical Tenant is always present and immutable:

- You cannot delete the default tenant.
- You cannot rename the default tenant.
- You cannot disable the default tenant.

If tenant scope is omitted in compatibility paths, requests resolve to the default tenant.

## Disable, rename, and delete

For 8.10:

- Disabling a Physical Tenant is not supported.
- Renaming a Physical Tenant is not supported.
- Deleting a Physical Tenant is not supported.

<!--

> TODO(physical-tenants): Add supported lifecycle operations for disable/rename/delete when product behavior is defined.

Author: Note TODO.

Reviewer 2: As mentioned above, these operations will not be supported in 8.10
We can also mention that in 8.10, if a physical tenant is removed from the configuration (intentionally or not) no data related to this physical tenant will be deleted, however there will be no processing and no API calls will be accepted (404 will be returned)
It is possible to "reactivate" the physical tenant by putting it back in the configuration

Include required API/config paths, preconditions, and rollback behavior.
-->

## Out of scope for 8.10

The following capabilities are out of scope for 8.10:

- Dynamic tenant creation without restart
- Tenant deletion
- Runtime tenant updates

## Upgrade behavior from 8.9

For single-tenant 8.9 clusters upgrading to 8.10:

- Existing root-level configuration becomes the `default` Physical Tenant behavior.
- No explicit migration step is required for this default mapping.

## Operational guidance

Before applying provisioning changes:

- Validate tenant IDs and property paths.
- Validate identity provider assignments.
- Validate storage isolation settings per tenant.
- Plan and execute a rolling restart window.

After rollout:

- Verify tenant-scoped APIs route to expected tenant context.
- Verify storage isolation and startup health.
- Verify authentication behavior for assigned providers.

<!--

> TODO(physical-tenants): Add a detailed runbook with command examples and expected health/readiness transitions once Day-2 operations behavior is finalized.

Author: Note TODO.

Reviewer 2: We can provide this in the next alphas
